Add Knx telegram trigger documentation (#30740)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/knx.markdown

![Obtain the user password in ETS](/images/integrations/knx/user_password.png)

## Triggers

The KNX integration provides its own trigger platform which can be used in automations.

### Telegram trigger

The `knx.telegram` trigger can be used to trigger automations on incoming or outgoing KNX telegrams.

<div class='note'>

> This trigger is also provided as device trigger by the `KNX Interface` device with support for setting the options in the automation builder UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This trigger is also provided as a device trigger by the `KNX Interface` device. It supports setting the options in the automation builder UI.
```

group_value_response:
  description: If set to `false`, the trigger will not fire on GroupValueResponse telegrams.
  type: boolean
  default: true
  required: false
group_value_read:
  description: If set to `false`, the trigger will not fire on GroupValueRead telegrams.
  type: boolean
  default: true
  required: false
incoming:
  description: If set to `false`, the trigger will not fire on incoming telegrams.
  type: boolean
  default: true
  required: false
outgoing:
  description: If set to `false`, the trigger will not fire on outgoing telegrams.
  type: boolean
  default: true
  required: false
{% endconfiguration %}

#### Available trigger data

In addition to the [standard automation trigger data](/docs/automation/templating/#all), the `knx.telegram` trigger platform has additional trigger data available for use.

- `trigger.destination` Destination group address
- `trigger.destination_name` Destination group address name
- `trigger.direction` Telegram direction
- `trigger.dpt_main` Destination group address main datapoint type number
- `trigger.dpt_sub` Destination group address sub datapoint type number
- `trigger.dpt_name` DPT value type name - see Sensor value types

> - `trigger.payload` Raw telegram payload. DPT 1, 2 and 3 yield integers 0..255; other DPT yield lists of integers 0..255

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `trigger.payload` Raw telegram payload. DPT 1, 2, and 3 yield integers 0..255; other DPT yield lists of integers 0..255
```

|----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------|
| `trigger.destination`      | string                      | no                    |
| `trigger.destination_name` | string                      | yes                   |
| `trigger.direction`        | string                      | no                    |
| `trigger.dpt_main`         | integer                     | yes                   |
| `trigger.dpt_sub`          | integer                     | yes                   |
| `trigger.dpt_name`         | string                      | yes                   |
| `trigger.payload`          | integer or list of integers | no                    |
| `telegram.source`          | string                      | no                    |
| `telegram.source_name`     | string                      | yes                   |
| `telegram.telegramtype`    | string                      | no                    |
| `telegram.timestamp`       | timestamp                   | no                    |
| `telegram.unit`            | string                      | yes                   |
| `telegram.value`           | any                         | yes                   |

> For values that require project data, if the information was not found, or no project file was provided, data will be set to `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For values that require project data: if the information was not found, or if no project file was provided, data will be set to `null`.
```

#### Examples

Example automation configuration

```yaml
- alias: Single group address trigger
  description: ''
  trigger:
  - platform: knx.telegram
    destination: 1/2/3
    group_value_read: false
    outgoing: false
  condition: []
  action: []
  mode: single
```

Example trigger data

```yaml
variables:
  trigger:
    id: "0"
    idx: "0"
    alias: null
    destination: 1/2/3
    destination_name: Light office brightness
    direction: Incoming
    dpt_main: 5
    dpt_sub: 1
    dpt_name: percent
    payload:
      - 255
    source: 1.0.51
    source_name: Dimming actuator 1
    telegramtype: GroupValueWrite
    timestamp: "2024-01-09T10:38:28.447487+01:00"
    unit: "%"
    value: 100
context: null
```

## Events

<div class='note'>

> For automation triggers it is recommended to use the [knx.telegram](#telegram-trigger) trigger instead of `knx_event`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For automation triggers it is recommended to use the [knx.telegram](#telegram-trigger) trigger instead of `knx_event`.
```
```suggestion
For automation triggers, it is recommended to use the [knx.telegram](#telegram-trigger) trigger instead of `knx_event`.
```

> For automation triggers it is recommended to use the [knx.telegram](#telegram-trigger) trigger instead of `knx_event`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For automation triggers, it is recommended to use the [knx.telegram](#telegram-trigger) trigger instead of `knx_event`.
```

### Read

You can use the `homeassistant.update_entity` service call to issue GroupValueRead requests for all `*state_address` of an entity.

> To manually send GroupValueRead requests use the `knx.read` service. The response can be used in automations by the `knx.telegram` trigger and it will be processed in KNX entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manually send GroupValueRead requests, use the `knx.read` service. The response can be used in automations by the `knx.telegram` trigger and it will be processed in KNX entities.
```
